>> Richard Feldman: So to recap,
this what we're gonna be building.
This thing called Conduit,
this medium clone.
And the way that we're gonna be doing
this is by using the virtual DOM.
The virtual DOM is something
that is popularized by React.
And it's something that elm uses as its
fundamental way of rendering things.
So whereas in JavaScript, you can opt into
a virtual DOM by using something like
React or
any of the virtual DOM systems out there.
But in Elm, it's the only way to do it.
All there is a is a virtual DOM.
That is the fundamental
primitive of rendering in Elm.
So what do we mean by the DOM?
So the DOM is the Document Object Model.
This is some HTML.
HTML, the Hypertext Markup Language,
is a representation of the DOM.
It's syntax that describes
a particular structure.
So here we have an unordered list.
It's got a class of languages.
It's got two li's inside of it.
One is Elm the other is JS.
This HTML describes this DOM structure.
So at the root,
we have root node that's a ul.
It's got a class attribute of languages.
Then it's got two child nodes.
One is an Li, another is a different Li.
Actually each of those Li's also
has a child node, a text node.
So one is a text node
called Elm has element.
There was a text node that has JS in it.
I'm gonna be honest with you,
for most of my career,
I did not know the text nodes existed,
I thought they were just magical strings.
Turns out the DOM nodes,
I just didn't know that for a long time.
So this HTML, in the upper left,
describes this DOM tree on the right
that's going to actually exist
in the browser's memory.
But there are lots of different ways
we can represent this DOM tree.
We don't have to use HTML to do that,
in fact Elm doesn't use HTML to do that.
Elm just uses plain function calls.
So, here's how we could
represent this in Elm.
So, we have a function called UL.
It's being passed two arguments.
The first is a list of attributes.
In this case, we have only one attribute,
class languages.
And then a list of child nodes.
So, in this case we have two child nodes,
both of them are Li's.
Each of the Li's has a list of attributes.
But these don't have any attributes unlike
the ul, so they're just empty lists.
And then they also have
a list of child nodes.
And in this case both of them have
a text node for their child nodes.
So Elm just uses plain function calls for
all of these.
And because Elm uses whitespace for
function applications
instead of parenthesis.
We can see that this has pretty visually
similar structure to the underlying DOM,
and also a pretty similar
structure to the HTML up here.
So Elm doesn't really need
a separate templating language for
this, because we can get something,
a little DSL that looks pretty similar,
just by writing clean Elm code and
normal function calls.
A little piece of trivia, this is actually
how React was originally designed.
Jordan Walke,
when he originally made React,
he just used it with plain function calls.
But at Facebook, they had been doing a lot
of PHP templating on the server side.
And when he made the first pull request
to introduce it to the company,
people were this is weird,
we wanna see our PHP looking templates.
So he actually invented jsx in
order to solve that problem and
to get his pull request accepted.
So he changed it from plain
function calls to a template.
And that's become the norm in
a lot of virtual DOM systems,
whereas Elm in some sense
goes back to the roots and
says fundamentally the big
idea here is functions.
We're just gonna use plain function
calls to describe the stuff, and
that's how our whole
code base at work works.
That's how all Elm code bases work,
nothing more than plain function
calls to describe these things.
So the one syntactic note has to do
with position of the commas here.
So this is not quite idiomatic Elm code.
The way that you would idiomatically write
this is with the comma on the left here.
The first time I saw this, I thought, that
looks weird, I'm not gonna do it that way,
I'm gonna do it a different way.
And then I realized the benefit of doing
it this way, and I switched, and then
got used to it, and subsequently think,
okay, yeah, this way actually is better.
So let me explain the problem
that this solves.
So let's say that I have
the comma on the end here, and
this is more typically how
it looks in JavaScript.
The problem is,
what happens if I forget that comma,
if I leave it off,
accidentally just left it off.
And I've definitively done this before.
What is actually happening here?
What is this code now do that's
different from what it did before?
Well previously what we had was we had
this is a function called
Li passing two arguments.
And then this is a function
called Li passing two arguments.
They're separated by a comma because
there are two elements on the list.
This one doesn't do that anymore.
In this one,
we're gonna get a compile error that says
you are passing five arguments to Li.
And you might be no I'm not,
what are you talking about?
I'm passing two arguments to Li, twice.
But actually,
without the comma there, this error
accurately represents what's going on.
We have Li, passing one argument,
two arguments.
There's no comma so
we're just gonna keep going.
It's just more whitespace.
Three arguments, four arguments,
five arguments to Li.
So getting this error message is
kind of confusing because it seems
to be just wrong.
It seems you are passing
all these arguments and
it's no I'm not,
I'm looking at the code it looks fine.
Especially if you have
a particularly long,
complicated expression it can be
a really confusing error to get.
But if you have this, instead
we have the comma on the left
now we have this vertical line.
This column of characters,
that makes it really,
really obvious if you leave the comma out.
And this works, no matter how
many things you add to the list.
You can just keep adding to the list,
and keep adding commas.
And if you ever forget
one of these commas,
it's immediately, blindingly obvious,
that there's something missing there.
So I reluctantly tried switching to
this style and then realized that,
I just never, ever got that error ever
again, and I was, okay, that's worth it.
The first time I was pair programming
with somebody at work and
they got that error and
were confused by it.
I was okay, yeah, we're switching,
we're gonna do it this way.
And today we have Elm Format which is
a code formatting tool that something
90% of Elm developers,
I think it's actually over 90%.
It's really ubiquitously used.
It's a prettier or go/format or gofump,
I believe they pronounce
it in other languages.
Where essentially the idea is to
enforce a common syntax across
all Elm programs and
it will do it like this.
Also worth nothing that Elm format
is unique, as far as I know, among
front end code formatters in that it has
no configuration options at all by design.
It cannot be configured in any way.
And that's a design goal because
it prevents style arguments.
It means that you can't get into an
argument about what you should configure
it about, what should go where.
Because there just aren't any
configuration options, it's pretty nice.
So to recap the things we've
talked about in Part 1.
First we talked about compiling,
so running Elm make,
passing Main.elm,
which is our source file.
And then output of elm.js,
which is the .js file
that we're ultimately going to give to the
browser using a script tag in index.html.
Talked about functions and how to
define them and also how to call them.
So when we call them passing, for
example, pluralize "leaf" "leaves" 1.
We don't use comas and
we don't use parenthesis.
If we do use parenthesis it's only to
disambiguate between nested expressions.
Not because function calling
actually needs any parenthesis.
Talked about if expressions,
so if quantity == 1 then.
We talked about how in Elm you use
double equals instead of triple equals,
we have then instead of curly braces.
Else is required because
if is an expression.
So you can pick it up and
move it in different places,
assign the result to a value
just like a JavaScript ternary.
And finally,
we talked about the virtual DOM and how,
in Elm, virtual DOM is done
using plain function calls.
So Li passing a list of attributes and
also a list of child nodes.
We also talked about how text nodes in Elm
are represented by a function called text.